24/8/2026
Measurement of Time
and Motion
The
CHAPTER
03
Learning Outcomes...
0
Time
Simple Pendulum
0 Distance and Speed
0
Motion
0
Distance Time graph
Introduction
0
= could be
questions
1
Velocity Time graph
= imp points
Time is the ongoing sequence of events in the past, present, and future that allows us to measure
duration and the interval between occurrences. It is a concept that has been essential to human
understanding since the beginning of ancient civilization. It is a measure of the duration of
events and is commonly defined by the natural phenomena that happens over and over again
in a regular fashion. Therefore, day and night were probably the first natural phenomenon
to which humans were exposed in a cyclical manner. Thus, day and night were first used
to define time. The time interval between the first noon and the second noon was taken for
granted as a day. Then humans wanted to know the exact moment of the day, so they invented
various timekeeping tools, or clocks. However, these methods were not highly accurate, and
it wasn't until the development of electronic oscillators and atomic clocks in the 20th century
that timekeeping became much more precise.
Measurement of Time
Time is a phenomenon by which human beings observe and record changes in the environment
and the universe.
For example: The time between one sunrise and the next is called a day, a month is measured
from one new moon to the next, and a year is fixed as the time taken by the earth to complete
one revolution around the sun.
Often we need to measure intervals of time which are much shorter than a day. Clocks or
watches are the most common time measuring devices.
One of the earliest means of measurement of time was with the help of movement
and change in the position of the sun during the day, and the moon during
the night. The position of stars also helped in estimating time during night.
Jantar Mantar located in Central Delhi is an advanced form of a Sundial.
Sundial
The device used to measure time is known as a clock. The older clocks like the sand clock, the
water clock, were somewhat crude type of clocks.
They only gave an approximation of a duration of time. Sundials were more accurate than the
sandclocks and the water clocks. Nowadays, we use a wrist watch or quartz clock. A mechanical
Physics Class 7
Measurement of Time and Motion (75)
