The pendulum is said to have completed one oscillation when its bob is starting from its mean
position O, moves to A to B and back to O. The pendulum also completes one oscillation when
its bob moves from one extreme position A to the other extreme position B and comes back to
A. The time taken by the pendulum to complete one oscillation is called its time period. The
time period of a simple pendulum depends upon the length of the pendulum and independent
of the mass of the bob.
DO YOU
KNOW? The first successful pendulum clock was invented by the Dutch scientist
 
Christiaan
Huygens, who built it in 1656. While Galileo Galilei had previously discovered
the principles of a pendulum's regular swing.
ACTIVITY
Let us understand the oscillatory motion of a pendulum.
CORNER >>> Make a pendulum by hanging a weight such as a stone from a string,
about 1 m in length.
You will also require a stopwatch to measure the time period.
Switch off any fans
 
nearby and let the pendulum come to rest in its mean
position. Displace the bob to the right or left by a distance equal to or less than 10% of the
length of the pendulum and release it.
Remember that, the time period of a pendulum is constant only for small oscillations.
Start your stopwatch as the bob passes through its mean position.
Allow the bob to swing through 25 complete oscillations and stop
 
the stopwatch at the end
of the 25th oscillation.
Divide the time on the stopwatch by 25. This gives the time period of the pendulum.
Increase the length of
 
the string and measure the time period again. Does the time period
increase or decrease? string
 
and measure
ILLUSTRATIONS
Why accurate measurement of time became
possible much after accurate measurement of
length and mass?
Ans.: Because the measurement of time was
done in terms of distance and mass. Mechanical
clocks were designed which used to measure
time in terms of
 
weight. Accuracy in measuring
length and mass enabled us to measure time
with more accuracy and precision.
2 What is simple pendulum?
Ans.: A simple device consisting of a small
metallic ball and a long thread is called a simple
pendulum. The metallic ball is specifically
called the bob.
3 What do you mean by time period?
Ans.: Time period is the time taken by an
oscillating body to complete one oscillation.
4 Why is time measured, and what is its
standard unit?
Ans.: Time measures the duration of events
or actions, letting us track when they begin,
end, and how long they last. The standard
unit of time is seconds, but other units like
minutes and hours are commonly used as
well, depending on the situation.
Physics | Class 7
Measurement of Time and Motion 77
