Motion
Motion is an important part of our life. We can't perform our day-to-day activities withou
movement. In order to go to school, office or any other place we need to move either by walkin
or by car, bus etc. We can't even take food without moving our hands and mouth. Even at
 
the
time of sleeping, we breathe air through our lungs and blood flows in arteries and veins. S
motion means movement. Motion can also be defined as a continuous change in the position of
an object with respect to time. Positions of the object can change in different ways with time
 
so
there exist different types of motion and these various types of motion are translatory (linear)
motion, vibratory or oscillatory motion, rotatory motion and random motion.
Translatory motion: When an object moves from one point to another along a straight line
or a smooth curve, its motion is called translatory. Translatory motion can be of two types-
rectilinear and curvilinear, depending on the path followed.
The motion of a body along a straight line with constant or variable speed is called rectilinear
motion. For example motion of a car on the straight road.
The motion of a body along a curved path is called curvilinear motion. For example motion of
a car in a banked road or in a turn.
Rotatory motion: When an object turns or rotates or spins about an axis, its motion is called
rotatory. Motion of earth about its axis and motion of a top about its axis are the examples of
rotatory motion.
Oscillatory motion: When a body moves to and fro between two points, repeatedly, its motion
is called oscillatory. A child on a swing and the pendulum of a clock are common examples
of oscillatory motion. This chapter attempts to build our concept regarding motion and its
different aspects.
Slow or
 
Fast Motion
Before understanding slow or fast motion we need to understand the state of rest. An object
is said to be at rest if it does not change its position with respect to its surroundings with
the passage of time. So, as soon as an object change its state from rest to motion then we can
comparatively say that it is either fast or slow motion of that object.
As we
 
know that there are a number of situations in everyday life where we need to understand
how slow or fast an object is moving. If you have to travel to a distant city as quickly as
possible, you will definitely prefer an aeroplane than a train or a car, for a simple reason that
the aeroplane travels faster than a train or a car.
Slow motion
Fast motion
In terms of motion, we can say walking is a slow motion whereas running is a
faster motion.
comparatively
78 Measurement of Time and Motion
