wrist watch is provided with a balance wheel which oscillates like a pendulum. In quartz cloc
fast vibrating crystals of quartz oscillate at a very precise rate and hence
measure time more accurately. The atomic clock is the most scientifically
developed clock is said to be most accurate of all. The atomic clock is
maintained at National Physical Laboratory (NPL) in Delhi, which
indicates the standard time. This atomic clock is accurate upto a millionth
part of a second.
Water clock
Sand
 
do
DO YOU
KNOW? The
 
study of timekeeping is known as “horology”, the term clock was used
for a striking clock, while a clock that did not strike the hours audibly was
called a timepiece.
» A ghatika is a unit of time measurement in ancient India equal to 24 minutes, where a full
day is divided into 60 ghatikas. A ghatika is a unit of time measurement in ancient India
equal to 24 minutes, where a full day is divided into 60 ghatikas.
Units of
 
Time
Time refers to the interval between two events taking place.
The SI unit of time is second.
Units of time in decreasing order:
1 millennium
10 centuries
1 century
10 decades
1 decade
1 year
10 years
365 days
1 day
1 hour
24 hours
60 minutes
1 minute
60 seconds
A Simple Pendulum
The famous astronomer Galileo Galilie had performed
experiments using a simple pendulum and suggested
that it can be used to measure time. He said, if a weight
hung from a string is made to swing, it always completes
one to-and-fro motion in exactly the same time. In other
words, it repeats the oscillation in equal intervals of
time.
Extreme
position
Figure (a)
B
Mean
Figure (b)
position
A simple pendulum consists of a weight (like small
metallic ball or a piece of stone) tied to a string. The
other end of the string is tied to a rigid support. The metal ball is called the bob.
Figure (a) shows the pendulum at rest in its mean position. When the bob of the pendulum
is released after taking it slightly to one side, it begins to move to-and-fro [figure (b)]. The
to-and-fro motion of a simple pendulum is an example of periodic and oscillatory motion.
Extreme
position
76 Measurement of Time and Motion
Cla
