=== DOC PAGE 1 ===
CHAPTER
Electricity: Circuits and
their Components
01
Learning Outcomes...
000
0 Electric Charges and Electric Current
Electric Circuit and Symbol of its Components
Electric Potential and Potential Difference
Heating effect of Electric Current
Electric Fuse
Magnetic Effect of Electric Current
Electromagnet
Introduction 13/4/26
As soon as we press the switch of a torch ON, it starts glowing. For the torch bulb to glow,
there must be something flowing in the wires. This 'something' must have energy, otherwise
it cannot produce heat and light energy in the torch bulb. We call this 'something' as electric
current. An electric current has electrical energy. This electrical energy gets converted into light
and heat energy when the current flows through an electric bulb. The electric current flows from
the end of the cell marked '+' (called the positive terminal) through the metal wires, to the end
marked' (called the negative terminal). The arrangement where an electric current flows in
a conductor when it is connected to a source of electric current is known as an electric circuit.
In this chapter, we will study about electric components and devices which are represented
by symbols in a circuit diagram, heating effect of current and magnetic effects of current. In
magnetic effects of current we will deal with magnetic effects by current flowing in a wire.
Torch, Simple Electrical Circuit and their Symbol
A Torchlight
A torch, or flashlight, is a portable electric light that works by converting stored electrical
energy from a battery into light. An electric torch works by completing an electric circuit when
the switch is turned on, allowing electricity to flow from the batteries to a bulb or LED. This
current makes the bulb's filament (or the LED) glow, producing light. A reflector and lens then
focus and direct the light, creating a beam.
Construction: A torch contains the following basic parts:
Battery: This is the power source. It stores chemical energy and turns it into electrical
energy. It has a positive (+) and a negative (-) end.
·
Switch: This component is used to close and open the electric circuit. When you turn the switch
on, it completes the path, allowing current to flow. When you turn it off, it breaks the path.
Bulb (or LED): This is the component that produces light.
Incandescent bulb: Contains a thin filament, usually made of tungsten, that glows
when heated by the electric current.
WIYOW
Physics | Class 7
Electricity: Circuits and their Components
☑


=== DOC PAGE 2 ===
LED (Light-Emitting Diode): A more energy-efficient alternative that uses a semiconductor
to produce light.
Wire and Spring: Wire is a link between the bulb and the switch. Spring is a link between
the cells and the switch. When the switch is pushed to the 'on' position, the circuit is
complete and the both glows. When the switch is pushed to the 'off' position, the circuit
is incomplete (broken)
 
the bulb does not glow.
Reflector and lens: A reflector is placed behind the bulb to reflect and direct the light
forward, while a lens focuses this light into a beam.
Plastic casing Metal contacts
Reflector
Bulb
Slide switch
ILLUSTRATIONS
What is the use of reflector in torch?
Ans.:
 
A reflector in a torch uses to collect and
focus the
 
light from the bulb into a powerful
Cells
Metal spring
A Simple Electrical Circuits
Electric Cell
and parallel beam.
2
What is the use of spring in torch?
Ans.: Spring is a link between the cells and
the switch.
An electric
 
cell is a portable source of electrical energy. All
electric cells have two terminals; one is called a positive
terminal (+) while the other is negative terminal (-). The
metal cap serves as the positive terminal of the electrical
cell, while the metal disc acts as the negative terminal.
Positive
terminal
Battery
An electric cell
A battery consists of two or more electric cells connected to each other. There is usually a thick
wire or a metal strip connecting the positive terminal of one cell to the negative terminal of
the next. To place the cells correctly in a battery compartment, '+' and symbols are usually
printed there on the dry cell or storage
battery.
The cells in a torch are placed in a specific
order to form a battery. When cells are
placed with the positive terminal of one
cell connected to the negative terminal of
(b)
A battery made up of (a) two cells (b) four cells
the next, the lamp glows. If the cells are not connected in series correctly (positive to 
negative
the
 
lamp
 
does
 
not
 
glow
.
Electricity: Circuits and their Components
Negative
terminal
),
Class 7 | Physics


=== DOC PAGE 3 ===
as Introd
called.
Copper Zinc
produce electricity.
Copper wires
it glows.
Bulb
ACTIVITY To make your own battery to
CORNER » Take seven medium sized
potatoes. In each potato, Insert
a zinc strip on one end and a
copper strip on the other end.
>>> Connect the zinc strip of one potato to the copper
strip of the other potato using copper wires.
>>> Connect the electric bulb as shown in the figure.
>>> You will see that as soon as you connect the bulb,
>>> The bulb glows because the whole arrangement
of potatoes acts as a battery.
Potato
Electric Lamp
Incandescent Lamp
An incandescent lamp is a light bulb that uses a thin, glowing
wire called a filament to produce light. When electricity flows
through the filament, it heats up to a very high temperature
and glows. The filament is protected from oxidation by a
glass bulb that is either filled with an inert gas or has its
air removed.
Filament
Glass bulb
Thick wire
trod
Thick
wire
Components of an incandescent lamp :
Insulator
(support)
ACTIVITY
Let us observe
CORNER
-Metal case
(other terminal)
Metal tip
(one terminal)
Glass Bulb: A glass enclosure that protects the filament.
Tungsten Filament: A thin wire that heats up and glows
when electricity passes through it. Tungsten is used because it can withstand very high
temperatures.
Insulator
Contact Wires: Wires that connect the filament to the bulb's electrical contacts at the base.
Support Wires: Wires that hold the filament in place.
Glass Mount: A glass support that holds the filament and contact wires.
Screw Cap: The metal base of the bulb that fits into a light socket, providing both mechanical
support and electrical contact.
>> For this activity, you will require a torchlight with
an incandescent lamp (or light bulb). Many old
torchlights still use such lamps. With your
 
teacher's
help, confirm that
 
your torchlight
 
uses an incandescent
lamp. Take the torch and examine its lamp.
>> What
 
do you see? Do you notice a thin
 
wire
 
fixed
 
in the middle of the
 
glass bulb?
Yes, there is a thin
 
wire (filament) fixed in the middle of the glass bulb.
 
When
the torch is switched ON, the thin wire inside the glass bulb glows. After
inspecting the lamp, we find that the filament is attached to two thicker wires
that support it. One wire connects to the metal case at the lamp's base, and
the other connects to the metal tip at the center of
 
the base, forming the two
terminals
 
which are fixed so they don't touch each
 
other as shown in figure.
Physics | Class 7
9
Electricity: Circuits and their Components


=== DOC PAGE 4 ===
LED Lamp
An LED lamp for torch
LED lamp
An LED lamp is a type of light that uses a small
electronic component called an LED (Light Emitting
Diode) to produce light. When electricity passes
through the LED, it lights up. Most of the torches
that we use today have an LED lamp instead of an
incandescent lamp. Unlike incandescent lamps, LEDs do not have filaments but have two terminals,
one is positive (longer wire), and the other is negative (shorter wire). Thus, a torch may use one
or more LEDs and have different shapes.
ACTIVITY
CORNER
Let us observe
Take an LED of any
 
colour and observe.
Notice the
 
length of
 
two
 
wires attached
to the LED.
» Do you see
 
any filament inside it. No,
there is no filament inside the LED's. Also, one wire (the
positive terminal) is longer than the other (the negative
terminal).
Making an electric lamp glow using an electric cell or battery.
The electric current flows through the
lamp when the circuit is complete, causing
the lamp to glow. The direction of the
electric current flows from the positive
terminal to the negative terminal of the
electric cell in the circuit.
LEDS of different colours
For incandescent lamps, it does not matter
which terminal (positive or negative) is connected to which terminal of electric cell. The lamp
will glow as long as the circuit is complete and current flows through its filament.
Electric Switch
A switch is a simple device that either completes or breaks a circuit. The switches used for
lights and the other devices at home work the same way, though they are designed differently.
To understand 'ON' and 'OFF' position of switch, let us take a simple arrangement as shown
in figure, containing pins, safety pin and two connecting wires. This arrangement is the
representation of switch in circuit.
'ON' Position: When the safety pin touches both
drawing pins, it closes the gap, completing the circuit
and allowing current to flow. The current flows from
the positive terminal to the negative terminal of the
electric cell, making the lamp glow.
'OFF' Position: When the safety pin does not touch
the second drawing pin, there is a gap in the circuit,
preventing current from flowing. This means the lamp
does not glow. The circuit is considered open in this
position.
Switch in 'ON' position
Switch in 'OFF' position
مله
Class 7 | Physics
Electricity:
 
Circuits and their
 
Components


=== DOC PAGE 5 ===
ILLUSTRATIONS
3 How does an
 
electric
 
cell produce electricity?
Ans.: The electric cell produces electricity due
to chemical reactions that occurs inside it.
4 Name a safe source of electricity for
performing science experiments in school
laboratory.
Ans.: Electric cells and batteries.
5 Why is the inert gas filled in electric bulb?
Symbols of Electric Components
Ans.: Electric bulbs are usually filled with
chemically inactive gases (inert gases) like
nitrogen and argon. These gases are filled
in an electric bulb to prevent the tungsten
filament from burning out due to oxidation.
6 What is the full name of LED?
Ans.: "Light Emitting Diode"
What is the melting point of tungsten?
Ans: The melting point of tungsten is
 
3422°C.
In electric circuits, we have to show various electrical components such as a cell, a battery,
connecting wires, an open switch, a closed switch, and an electric bulb (or lamp), etc. Now, to
draw the electric circuits by making the actual sketches of the various electrical components is
a difficult job and takes a lot of time. So, the scientists have devised some symbols for electrical
components which are easy to draw. They are called electrical symbols or circuit symbols.
The common electrical symbols for electrical components which are used in drawing circuit
diagrams are given below: MP..
Component
Description
Represented by a straight line, provides a
medium for the flow of current in a circuit,
usually made of copper and coated with
plastic.
In the symbol, the longer line represents
the positive terminal and the shorter one
represents the negative terminal of the cell,
simpler source of electric current.
A combination of two or more cells.
Symbol
4F
+447
Used to open or close the circuit.
Electric Lamp
An electrical appliance containing filament
that glows when the current flows through it.
Close/ON
or
Open/OFF
Switch
Physics | Class 7
Electricity: Circuits and their Components
Cell
Battery
Wire


=== DOC PAGE 6 ===
Electric Charges
» Electric charge of a material body or particle
is the property due to which it produces and
experiences electrical and magnetic effects.
► Charges are of two types: positive charge
and negative charge.
» Proton is a positively charged particle present
in the nucleus of an atom. Electrons are
negatively charged particle which revolve
around the nucleus.
Properties of electric charges :
►Like charges repel and unlike charges attract
each other.
Electric Circuit
Closed circuit
COMPETITION WINDOW
Electric charges can neither be created nor
be destroyed in an isolated system. This
means electric charge is conserved.
✓
Electric charges are quantised i.e., the total
charge of the body is the integral multiple
of charge of electrons.
. q = ne; where n is an integer and e
1.6 × 10-19 C.
✓✓ The SI unit of charge is coulomb (C).
Electric Current
The rate of flow of electric charge through
a conductor is called the electric current
and it is denoted by I.
1
-
 =
Qº
The SI unit of electric current is ampere
which is denoted as A.
The closed continuous path through which an electric current
flows is called an electric circuit. An electric circuit can be
represented by a simple and clear circuit diagram. The electric
circuits can be drawn using electric components shown in
figure.
Using the symbols, the electric circuit can be drawn as follows:
Bulb
Cell
When the switch is in 'ON' condition, the circuit is closed, the electric current flows from the
positive terminal of the battery to negative terminal and instantly the bulb glows.
When the switch is in 'OFF' condition, the circuit is open, no electric current flows along this
broken or incomplete path through any part of the circuit and the bulb does not glow.
Open circuit
Usually copper wires are used for making connections in a circuit as they are good conductors
of electric current. But they are covered with plastic, which is a bad conductor of electricity,
so that the user does not get a shock. Many devices such as torches, toys, TV remote controls
use batteries to work.
Electricity: Circuits and their Components
Class 7 | Physics
t


=== DOC PAGE 7 ===
ILLUSTRATIONS
iv. Cells
What do you understand by an open
circuit?
Ans: An open circuit occurs when there is
a break in the circuit which stops the flow
of current. Given figure shows an open
circuit. Breaks in the circuit can be due to
many causes, such as a loose lamp holder
or a missing wire in the circuit.
Ans: (i) Conductor→ d. allows
electricity
4F
Open circuit
Match the following in column I to those
in column IL
Column I
Column II
Conductor a. a collection of cells.
Circuit
vi. Switch
b. used to open or close a
ii. Insulator
Electric Potential and Potential Difference
» Electric potential at a point is the work
done in moving a positive unit charge
 
from
infinity to that point.
» Potential difference between two points is
the amount of
 
work done in moving a unit
positive charge from one point to the other
work
W
V
 
=
Electric potential = charge
 
or
» The SI unit of electric potential is volt (V).
Ohm's Law
» The current flowing through a metallic
conductor is directly proportional to the
d. allows electricity to
 
flow
through it.
v. Battery
e. complete path for the
flow of electricity.
f. substances that do not
allow electricity to
 
flow
through it.
Circuit
to
flow through it
e. complete path
for the
 
flow of
electricity
Insulator
substances that
circuit.
c. generates electricity.
do not allow
(iv) Cells
electricity to
flow through it.
(v) Battery
c generates
electricity
(vi) Switch
→a a collection of
cells.
b. used to open or
close a circuit
COMPETITION WINDOW
potential difference applied across the ends
of the metallic conductor, provided the
physical condition remain the same ie.,
I - Var V = 1
→ V=IR; where R is the proportionality
constant
 
called the
 
resistance of
 
the conductor
» Resistance is the property of a conductor
to resist the flow of charge through it.
» SI unit of resistance is ohm and is denoted
by
 
Q
» According to Ohm's law, R=
V
Physics Class 7
Electricity: Circuits and their Components


=== DOC PAGE 8 ===
DO YOU
KNOW? An ammeter' is the circuit element which is used to measure the current
 
flowing in
an electric circuit. Similarly, a 'voltmeter' is used to measure the electric potential
difference between two points in an electric circuit.
Effects of Electric Current
When electric current flows through a conductor, it can produce many
 
effects. We make use of
these effects in various real life applications. When the current flows through a circuit, we see
various effects of current depending on the components being used. We have already observed
the lighting effects of the electric current in a glowing bulb..Let us study about the heating and
magnetic effects of electric current.
Heating Effect of Electric Current
When an electric current is passed through a wire, the wire becomes hot and produces
heat. This is called the heating effect of current. For example, the filament of bulb is the
part which gives light, when a bulb is connected in a circuit and switched on, its filament
becomes so hot that it gives out light. When bulb glows for a long time, the current also
flows through it for long time, the longer the bulb glows the hotter it becomes. Therefore,
it can be concluded that :
) The electric current flowing through a conductor produces heating effect.
) Longer the current flowing through the circuit, higher the heating effect produced
(iiby it.
ACTIVITY
CORNER
To show that electric current produces
▸▸ Take a 4.5 volt battery, long insulated
(copper) wire and a thermometer.
Wind a copper wire around the
bulb of the thermometer so that the
spirals do not touch themselves and the ends of the
wire should be fairly long. Connect the ends of the
wire to the terminals of a 4.5 volt battery.
After
 
few minutes, you will observe that
 
the temperature
rises on the thermometer, this is because the electric
current that flows through the wire develops heat.
heat.
Flow of electricity produces heat
Some appliances such as electric heater, electric immersion rod, electric toaster, electric iron,
etc., also use this property of heating due to electric current. They have wound coils of wire
known as heating element' through which current flows resulting in its heating due to resistance
offered by the wire.
The amount of heat generated in a wire depends on the material, length and thickness of the
wire. Thus for different requirements, the wires of different materials and different lengths
and thickness are used.
An electric bulb produces heat while producing light. This leads to wastage of electricity. Use of
compact fluorescent lamps (CFL's), LED's can reduce this wastage to a large extent. However,
before buying any electrical appliances, one should look for the ISI mark of the Bureau of Indian
Standards. This ensures that the appliance is safe and wastage is minimum.
Electricity: Circuits and their Components
Class 7 | Physics


=== DOC PAGE 9 ===
Tungsten and nichrome get too hot on passing current through them. It makes, them
useful for making filaments of electric bulbs and other heating devices (heaters, irons, geysers,
toasters etc.).
Electric bulbs have a filament made of tungsten while the filaments of electric iron, electric
heaters, geysers, toasters are made of nichrome.
Tungsten and nichrome have the ability to withstand very light temperature without melting.
Electric Fuse
Electric fuse is a safety device used in electrical circuits. It is used to prevent fires and protect
electrical devices from damage.
Glass tube
Fuse wire
Fuse
 
wire
Symbol for
a fuse
A fuse is a small piece of wire of an alloy of adequately low melting point (usually 63%
tin and 37% lead) connected to an electric circuit. There is a maximum limit of the current
which can safely flow through a circuit. If the current exceeds the safe limit, then the fuse
wire gets heated up and melts. This breaks the circuit and the appliance is saved from getting
ACTIVITY
To show the working of a fuse.
CORNER
>>> Take a battery of
 
four
 
cells, a thin strand of steel wool
(steel wool commonly used for cleaning utensils),
two connecting wires. Connect the strand of steel
wool to
 
the circuit
 
containing battery using connecting
Cell
wires. The steel wool will serve as a fuse wire.
Fuse wire
>> Now, close the key of the circuit. Observe the strand of steel wool.
The steel strand melts down and breaks the circuit. The current stops flowing in the circuit.
This is how a fuse works.
burnt.
Nowadays, a device called as miniature circuit breaker (MCB) is also used
instead of fuses, in the household electric circuits. It is a switch that automatically
stops the current in a circuit if the current in it exceeds the specified maximum
limit.
Physics Class 7
Electricity: Circuits and their Components
11


=== DOC PAGE 10 ===
Joule's Law of Heating
If amount of charge flows through a
conductor with potential difference V. then
Work done is W = QV
But = Q/t
Ixt
From equation (i) and (ii), W = Vlt
Also by Ohm's law, V IR
W = (IR)It = 1²Rt
...(i)
.(ii)
This work is converted into heat energy,
H = 1²Rt
→ Heat energy, H ∞ 12² and H & R and
Hat
» Overloading: The condition in which too
many electrical appliances of high power
Magnetic Effect of Electric Current
COMPETITION WINDOW
rating are switched on at the same time, then
the total current drawn by the appliances
through the circuit may exceed its rated
value This is known as overloading.
>> Short circuit: When two naked wires of
electricity supply line touch each other, a
large amount of current flow through the
wires. This phenomenon is known as short
circuiting.
Always, use proper fuses which have been
specified for particular applications, carrying
ISI mark. Never use just any wire or strip
of metal in place of a fuse.
When electric current passes through a wire carrying current, it behaves like a magnet. This is
called the magnetic effect of current.
ACTIVITY
CORNER
Understanding the magnetic effect of current.
>>> To
 
understand the magnetic effect of current take a magnetic compass, place
it on a table and allow it to come to rest. Remember, it will always come
to rest, pointing in the north-south direction. Take a straight copper wire,
about 10-12 inches long. Keep the wire parallel to the compass needle and
connect its two ends to a cell and a switch to complete the circuit. Keep the
switch of the circuit 'on' to allow the current to flow through it, while carefully observing the
direction of the compass needle. You will notice that as soon as the current starts flowing in
the circuit, the needle shows a deflection (sudden change in its direction). Now, if you open
the switch, you will see that the compass needle gets back to its original north-south direction.
Repeat the experiment a few times, you will notice that the needle deflects when the current
is switched on and stays in that position as long as the current flows in the wire. When the
current is switched off, the needle comes back to its original north-south direction.
Cell
North
North
A
Copper
Copper
wire
wire
Compass
Cell
No current
in wire
Compass
needle
Switch
open
B
South
Current
flowing
in wire
Switch
closed
Compass
needle
deflects
B
South
(a) No current is flowing in wire AB,
so the compass needle is in its usual
north-south position
(b) Current is flowing in the wire AB,
so the compass needle gets deflected
(or moves)
This experiment was first performed by Hans Christian Oersted in 1820 to show the magnetic
effect of current. He concluded that when electric current passes through a wire, it behaves
like a magnet.
12 Electricity: Circuits and their Components
Class 7 | Physics


=== DOC PAGE 11 ===
DO YOU
KNOW? Extremely weak electric currents are produced in human body by the movement
of charged particles called ions. Due to this a very weak magnetism is
produced in the human body. This is the basis of the technique called Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI).
ILLUSTRATIONS
10 The heating element of a heater becomes
red hot but not the connecting wire. Why?
Ans.: This is because the resistance of the
heating wire in the element is high, whereas
that of the connecting wire is extremely
low.
What is the difference between a fuse
wire and a heating element?
Ans.: A fuse wire is a safety device which
prevents damages to electrical circuits and
possible fires where as a heating element is
used to heat up things. The fuse wire has
low melting point, whereas the heating wire
has a high melting point. Fuse wire is made
up of tin-lead alloy, whereas heating wire is
made of constantan.
12 Do you think an electromagnet can be
used for separating
 
plastic bags
 
from a garbage
heap? Explain.
Ans.: No, the plastic bags do not get attracted
by the magnet, so they cannot be separated by
an electromagnet. Plastic
 
bags are not magnetic
materials, only magnetic materials like iron
can be attracted by the electromagnet.
13 An electrician is carrying out some repairs
in your house. He wants to replace a fuse
by a piece of wire. Would you agree? Give
reasons for your response.
Ans.: No, we would not agree to allow to
replace the fuse by a wire. Wires in the fuses
are of specific melting points. So we should
always use ISI marked fuses in our houses to
prevent short circuits.
Electromagnet, Electrical Conductor and Insulator
Electromagnet
An electromagnet is based on the magnetic effect of current. It consists of a long length of
insulated copper wire coiled around an iron rod or a bar. When current is passed through this
coil, the iron rod behaves like a magnet. The magnetism of the iron rod disappears as soon as
the current through the coil is switched off. Therefore, an electromagnet is a temporary magnet.
Along with the current, the magnetism can also be switched 'OFF' or 'ON'.
The Factors on which the Strength of an Electromagnet depends
The strength of an electromagnet depends directly upon
the amount of current flowing through the coil.
the number of turns in the coil.
The strength of electromagnet also depends inversely upon the length of the electromagnet,
which means lesser the length of electromagnet, more will be the strength of electromagnet.
Uses of Electromagnets
In cranes to pick magnetic materials from a junkyard.
In electric bells.
In loudspeakers.
By doctors to remove iron splinters from eyes.
In electric motors.
Physics | Class 7
Electricity: Circuits and their Components
13


=== DOC PAGE 12 ===
DO YOU
KNOW? William Sturgeon is another scientist who experimented with electromagnets. He
created one of the first practical electromagnets in 1824, which consisted of a
horseshoe-shaped iron core wrapped with multiple turns of wire.
Electric Bell
Gong
An electric bell works on the principle of magnetic effect of electric
current.
It consists of a coil of wire wound on an iron piece. The coil acts
as an electromagnet. An iron bar with a hammer at one end is kept
close to the electromagnet. There is a contact screw near the iron
strip Initially when we switch on the circuit, current starts flowing
in the circuit, and the iron piece wound by the coil gets magnetised.
This electromagnet, then attracts the iron bar towards it.
Hammer
Arm
- Contact screw
-Soft iron strip
Electromagnet
Switch
When the current stops flowing, the iron bar comes back to its initial
position as the electromagnet does not attract it any more. When
it reaches the initial position, the circuit is complete again and the
hammer strikes the gong again.
In the process, the hammer at the end of the strip strikes the gong
of the bell to produce sound.
.
However, when the electromagnet pulls the iron strip, it also breaks the circuit. The current
through the coil stops flowing. This process is repeated in quick succession. The hammer strikes
the gong every time the circuit is completed. This is how the bell rings.
» Maglev trains work by using magnets to levitate
the train above the tracks and propel it forward
COMPETITION WINDOW
without any mechanical contact, which eliminates friction and allows for high speeds.
Magnets are embedded in both the train and the guideway (track). The interaction between
the magnets like poles repelling each other lifts the train, while the alternating attraction and
repulsion of the magnetic fields propel it forward.
Like poles repel
and PUSH the
tram upward
Like poles repel
and PUSH the
train forward
OD
REPET
LEVITATION
DD
NSNSNSNSNSN
S
N
SNSNSI
-Opposite poles
attract and PULL
the train forward
PROPULSION
Electricity Circuits and their Components
Class 7 | Physics


=== DOC PAGE 13 ===
Electrical Conductors and Insulators
Conductors: Materials that allow electric current to pass through are called conductors. Metals
are good conductors. Examples: silver, copper, and gold.
Insulators: Materials that do not allow electric current to pass through are called insulators or
poor conductors of electricity. Examples: plastic, rubber, and ceramics.
Use of Conductors and Insulators
Metals like copper are used for making electrical wires because they are good conductors and
relatively inexpensive. Insulators (like plastic, rubber, and ceramics) are used to cover wires
because they stop electricity from passing through and keeps us safe from electric shocks.
The human body is a conductor of electricity Electric current passing through the body can
cause severe injury or death. Always handle electrical appliances with care. Avoid touching
switches or plugs with wet hands, and never use electrical devices in wet areas or with damaged
insulation or broken plugs.
DO YOU
KNOW? Silver is
 
the most conductive of
 
all metals, meaning it allows electric current to
 
flow
through it more freely than any other metal.
ACTIVITY
CORNER
To identify conductors and insulators from a given set of materials
(adult supervision required).
Fix the bulb and the cell on the cardboard sheet or wood, as shown in
the figure.
>>> Touch the two free ends of the wire
 
to the two ends
 
of various objects, such as a metal scale,
an eraser, a glass, the tip of your pen, the tips of your pencil lead (the pointed portion and
the flat portion at the back of the pencil), salt solution in a bowl and so on.
The bulb
 
will glow if the object
 
you touch with the free ends of
 
the wire is a conductor, and
the bulb will not glow if it is an insulator.
This way you will be able to classify various materials as conductor and insulator.
Application of Conductors and Insulators
Conductors are used in wires, switches, connectors, plugs, and sockets. Insulators are used to
cover wires, plug tops, and switches to prevent electric shock.
Electricity: Circuits and their Components
15
Physics | Class 7


=== DOC PAGE 14 ===
► COMPETITION WINDOW
"A superconductor is defined as a substance that
offers no resistance to the electric current when
it becomes colder than a critical temperature."
Superconductors are different from ordinary conductors,
such as copper. Unlike regular conductors whose resistance
gradually reduces, the superconductor's resistance drops
to zero below a fixed temperature, which is the critical
temperature. At this temperature, a superconductor can
conduct electricity with no resistance, which means no heat,
sound, or other forms of energy would be discharged from
the material when it reaches the "critical temperature" (Tc).
ILLUSTRATIONS
14 Describe an activity to show that you
can make an electromagnet in your school
laboratory.
Ans.: Take a long iron nail and wrap an
insulated copper wire on it. Connect the end
of the coil with a battery through a key. An
electromagnet is ready. When key is pressed
current flows in the wire and the heating coil
acts as a magnet.
15 An electrician uses screwdrivers and
pliers with plastic or rubber handles. Why?
Ans.: It is because rubber and plastic, both
Se rubber and
are insulators.
xcond
Electricity: Circuits and their Components
Class 7 | Physics


=== DOC PAGE 15 ===
CONCEPT MAP
An electric bell works on the
principle of magnetic effect of
electric current.
Electric Bell
Electromagnet
Gong
The magnet made by using electric
current is called an electromagnet.
Hammer
Arm
• Uses of
 
electromagnets
- in electric bells
Contact screw
-Soft iron strip
Electromagnet
- in cranes to pick magnetic materials
from junk yard.
- in electric motors
Switch
in loud speakers
Electricity:
Circuits and
their
Components
Heating Effect of Electric Current
• When an electric current passes
through a high resistance
wire, the electric energy gets
converted into heat energy.
This is known as heating effect
of electric current.
•
The electric heating appliances such as electric
bulb, electric room heater, electric iron works on
the principle of heating effect of current.
Electric Circuit
Electric Fuse
It is a safety device used in electric circuits. It works on
the principle of heating effect of electric current.
Fuse grip
A continuous conducting path
between the two terminals of a cell
or battery along which an electric
current flows is known as electric
circuit
Fuse
 
holder
Magnetic Effect of Electric Current
When electric current
passes through a wire, the
current carrying wire
behaves like a magnet. This
is called magnetic effect of
electric current
This is utilised in making
electromagnets.
•
Fuse wire
47
7441
Symbols of Electrical Components
Cell
Battery
Wire
Electric Bulb
• Open key/switch
Closed key/switch
Fuse wire
Open and Closed Circuit
Closed circuit
Open circuit
Electricity: Circuits and their Components
17
Physics | Class 7


=== DOC PAGE 16 ===
Solved Examples
1. What do you mean by electric current?
Ans: The rate of flow of electric charges is
known as electric current.
2. Define electric cell. What is the direction
of electric current in a circuit with an electric
cell?
Ans: The simplest source of an electric current
is an electric cell and it has a positive terminal
and a negative terminal. In an electric circuit the
current starts from positive terminal of the cell,
passes through the equipment connected to it,
and terminates at the negative terminal of the
cell.
3. What is the difference between open
circuit and closed circuit?
Ans.:
Open Circuit
Closed Circuit
1. A path which is open 1. A closed path in
and current cannot flow which current can
through it.
2
flow.
2.
Key
Key
3. Electrical devices 3. Electrical devices
cannot function in it.
can function.
4. What are the essential components of an
electric circuit?
Ans: The essential components of an electric
circuit are electric cell, electric bulb, switch,
battery and wires.
5. What is a fuse ?
Ans.: Fuse is a safety device that is used in
household circuits to protect the appliances. It
prevents them from getting burnt out in case
excess current flows through the circuit.
6. What is heating effect of the electric
current?
Ans.: The wire or component or device gets hot
when an electric current passes through them
This is known as heating effect of the electric
current. Defination
How much work is done in moving
charge of 5 C across two points having potential
difference 15 V ?
Ans.: As charge Q=5C
V = 15 V
W = ?
W=VQ 15 V×5C
W = 75 J
8.
Name the factors on which the heat
produced on an electric conductor depends.
Ans.: It depends on :
(i) the current for a given resistance.
(ii) the resistance for a given current and
(iii) the time for which the current flows through
the resistor.
9. On what factors does the heat produced
in a wire depends?
Ans.: Amount of heat produced in a wire
depends on its material, length and thickness.
10. What do you mean by magnetic effect?
Ans.: When electric current passes through
a wire, it behaves like a magnet. This is called
magnetic effect of electricity.
11. How does the electric heater or an electric
iron work?
Ans.: Electric heater or iron work on the basis
of heating effect of electricity. When an electric
current passes through the wires they become
hot. Electric heater or iron contains a coil of wire.
This coil of wire is called an element. When these
appliances are switched on after connecting to
18 Electricity: Circuits and their Components
Class 7 | Physics


=== DOC PAGE 17 ===
the electrical supply, their elements become red
hot and release heat.
12. Distinguish between the
 
terms 'overloading
and 'short circuiting'.
Ans.: Overloading: The condition in which too
many electrical appliances of high power rating
are switched on at the same time, then the total
current drawn by the appliances through the
circuit may exceed its rated value. This is known
as overloading.
Short circuit: When two naked wires of
electricity supply line touch each other, a large
amount of current flow through the wires. This
phenomenon is known as short circuiting.
13. Write the differences between a bar magnet
and an electromagnet.
Ans.:
Bar magnet
1. It is a permanent
magnet.
2. Its strength cannot
be changed.
3. Its magnetic
properties cannot
be turned OFF.
Electromagnet
1. It is a temporary
magnet.
2. Its strength can
be changed.
3. Its magnetic
properties can
be turned OFF.
14. What are the uses of electromagnets?
Ans.: Electromagnets are used in cars, speakers,
electric motors, electric bells, telephone receivers,
television, picture tubes etc.
15. What is an electric fuse made up of? How
does it function to prevent a circuit from
burning?
Ans.: An electric fuse is made up of an alloy
(mixture of metals 63% tin and 37% lead), with
low melting point. The heat produced due to
the high current, quickly melts the fuse wire
and break the circuit. Thus, stops the flow of
current and damage is avoided.
16. Why do we cover plug pin holes which
are within the reach of children with cellotape
or a plastic cover when not in use?
(NCERT Exemplar)
Ans.: The child may put his/her fingers into
the socket and he/she may get an electric shock
which could be fatal. Plastic/cellotape are bad
conductors of electricity and hence chances of
electric shock gets reduced.
17. Can we use the same fuse in a geyser and
a television set? Explain. (NCERT Exemplar)
Ans.: No, a geyser and a television set require
different amount of current to operate properly.
Therefore, the fuse used in these two appliances
will be of different ratings.
18. Paheli does not have a night lamp in her
room. She covered the bulb of her room with
a towel in the night to get dim light. Has she
taken the right step? Give one reason to justify
your answer.
(NCERT Exemplar)
Ans.: No, the towel may burn due to the heat
produced by the bulb. Besides, it will also result
in wastage of electric energy. She could have
used a lamp shade.
19. Do all bulbs we use work on the principle
of heating effects of electric current? Discuss.
Ans.: No, filament bulbs we use work on
heating effect of electric current. In these bulbs,
in addition to light, lot of unwanted heat is
also generated and this results in the wastage
of electricity. We have different types of bulbs,
known as fluorescent tube lights which work on
a different principle. Compact fluorescent lamps
(CFL) also reduce wastage and can be fixed in
the ordinary bulb holders.
20. Boojho made an electromagnet by winding
50 turns of wire over an iron screw. Paheli also
made an electromagnet by winding 100 turns
over a similar iron screw. Which electromagnet
will attract more pins? Give reason.
Ans.: Paheli's electromagnet will attract more
pins as it has more number of turns of wire on it
and thus a stronger electromagnet.
(NCERT Exemplar)
Physics | Class 7
Electricity: Circuits and their Components


=== DOC PAGE 18 ===
NCERT Section
1. Choose the incorrect statement.
(a) A switch is the source of electric current
in a circuit.
(b) A switch helps to complete or break the
circuit.
(c) A switch helps us to use electricity as per
our requirement.
(d) When the switch is in 'OFF' position,
there is an air gap between its terminals
2. Observe figure with which material connected
between the ends A and B, the lamp will
not glow?
4. A student forgot to remove the insulator
covering from the connecting wires while
making a circuit. If the lamp and the cell are
working properly, will the lamp glow?
6. In figure: (i) If S₂ is in 'ON' position, S₁ is
in 'OFF' position, which lamp(s) will glow?
(ii) If
 
S₂ is in 'OFF' position, S₁ is in 'ON'
position, which lamp(s) will glow?
(iii) If
 
S₁ and S₂ both are in 'ON' position,
which lamp(s) will glow?
'OFF' position,
(iv) If both S1 and S2 are in
which lamp(s) will glow?
Vidyut has made the circuit as shown in
figure. Even after closing the circuit, the
lamp does not glow. What can be the possible
reasons? List as many possible reasons as
 
you
can for this faulty operation. What will you
do to find out why the lamp did not glow?
8.
In figure in which case(s) the lamp will not
glow when the switch is closed.
(a)
B
3. In figure, if the filament of one of
 
the lamps is
broken,
 
will
 
the
 
other glow?
 
Justify
 
your answer.
5. Draw a circuit diagram for a simple torch
using symbols for electric components.
(b)
(c)
fo
(d)
9.
Suppose the '+' and '-' symbols cannot
be read on a battery. Suggest a method to
identify the two terminals of this battery.
10. You are given six cells marked A, B, C, D,
E, and F. Some of these are working and
some are not. Design an activity to identify
which of them are working.
(i) List the items that you require.
(ii) Write the procedure that you will follow.
(iii)
 
With the items, carry out the activity
to identify the cells that are working.
11. An LED requires two cells in series to glow.
Tanya made the circuit as shown in figure.
Will the lamp glow? If not, draw the wires
for correct connections.
ctricity: Circuits and their Components
Class 7 | Physics


